+++
categories = []
comments = false
date = 2021-10-16T21:11:11-04:00
draft = false
showpagemeta = true
slug = ""
tags = []
title = "My Job Search Experience"
description = "Documenting my journey of trying to find a job in the CS industry"

+++

Actual Published Date: 9/11/2022 

At long last, the time has finally come and I have started to look for a job :(. Like any big life event, there's certainly been sadness, excitement, stress, fear, and many other emotions too. It's definitely not an easy process and I'm still going through it (no job yet xd), but I do feel like I'm starting to get the hang of things a little bit, and I thought it would be cool to document the general process up to this point and hopefully eventually be able to give some advice on what worked for me. For the format of this post, I will probably do a step by step "guide" similar to my [site creation guide](https://andyctct.netlify.app/blog/creating-this-website/). This doesn't mean that these steps should be done exactly in the order below, but they certainly do give a rough idea of a typical order. This piece will also again be aimed at the beginner, I'm sure most people can skip a few (or all) steps, so proceed as you like. 

UPDATE 12/24/21: Landed a summer internship, reflections on that process at the end of this blog post in the MY ANECDOTAL EXPERIENCES section

UPDATE 9/11/22: Finally published this after having the full draft for so long, it's been so long that I've already finished my first internship period. Currently extended my summer internship into the fall semester so I'll be taking at least this semester off from school. Going to start looking for winter / summer positions soon. Market has changed quite a bit so we'll see how things go.

- Step 1: Resume. Resume. Resume. Definitely one of if not the most important part of the application process because it's what gets you in the door. Putting in the effort to make a resume that you're satisfied with (and preferably has been vetted) is an overwhelmingly worthwhile investment of your time. After all, chances are you're going to use this resume a considerable number of times (could very easily be in the hundreds), and practically every single time you use it, it determines whether or not you'll move along in the application process. Just to drive home the importance, if you have a poor resume that fails basic resume screens, you will be missing out on a LOT of opportunities, so really make sure you have one that gets the job done. If you're not sure about the quality of your resume or you suspect that your resume is causing you to miss out on opportunities, it never hurts to get your resume vetted, and there are tons of great resources for this including your school, online forums, or even just a few friends. Another perk of having a solid resume is that it will make it simple for you to update it down the line, but I would also note here that you might want to look into different resume formats as you acquire more and more experience. Now as for specific resume tips, I am not going to cover much purely because there are an abundance of resources for that online so I would recommend looking at a few of them for some basic do's and dont's. As for resume templates, I personally think they're completely fine and I would just say that if you're going to use a template, keep your professional goal in mind and don't get too carried away.  

- Step 2: Once you have a resume that you are completely confident in, then the next step is to obviously go out there and apply. I'm of the belief that you shouldn't be too picky with your applications because you really limit yourself and you might miss out on a lot of opportunities, plus it's free to apply so not much harm in doing so if you're on the fence about one. However, I've also heard statistics and believe that you shouldn't apply to *too* many places especially if you're not very interested in them, this is because time is obviously scarce so if you're applying to too many places then chances are that you're not putting much effort into the places you are applying to. This isn't so much a problem with some companies who only require a resume and some basic info for the initial application, but for others which may require cover letters or require detailed responses to general questions, or give OAs (Online Assessments) right off the bat, then putting a little bit of effort into a lot of places may not work as well as concentrating your effort on the few places that really interest you. On the topic of cover letters specifically, it's a practice that isn't too common anymore in my experience (unless you were on UOFT PEY in my year, another drastic flaw of the co-op system), most places will give you the option to submit one, but I've seen very few that make it mandatory. If you need one, then just like I talked about with resumes above, there are an abundance of great resources taking you through how to build a cover letter. 

- Step 2.5: This is a quick note that I want to mention about the job searching process in general, and I find it fitting to put here right after the application shotgunning step. Like I said at the beginning of the post, finding a job is stressful and difficult for the vast majority of people. So keeping a healthy mental state, and not burning yourself out is a challenging, but essential step. In many cases, even when it doesn't matter *when* you get the job, the process of looking for jobs and not getting them wears you down, this is an unavoidable occurrence in my opinion. Time mercilessly continues ticking, everyone around you seems to be finding jobs, both internal and external pressure continuously mounts. Therefore, what I think is an effective solution is not some preventative methods because again, I think it's an extremely tall ask to tell someone not to feel stressed or disappointed about rejections or the lack of job opportunities. Instead, I think remedial solutions can be very useful. Since everybody's experience and situation can differ so drastically, I won't touch too much on specific ways to maintain a healthy mental state. Something I do is think about it in perspective, do I feel like things will turn out okay in the end? If not, is it only the job search that I'm worried about or are there other underlying factors? That's just a personal introspective strategy but I recommend doing whatever works for you, whether it's taking a deload week to refresh and reset, or talking to people about your job searching experiences so far, etc. At the end of the day, remember that even though a job may be greatly important to your life, your life is still much more than the job.  

- Step 3: Lastly, the interview stage. Congrats, you made it past the screenings and maybe a few OAs. Now comes most people's least favourite part, it's certainly my least favourite part. Interviewing. Note that I have only done virtual interviews at this point thanks to the big C word, and all my interviews were for computer science related positions, so I will be commenting exclusively from my experience in those. To start, everybody approaches interviews differently and handles interviews differently, and different companies will also approach interviews differently and handle them differently. For specific interview advice, once again the internet is our friend, it possesses an amazing variety of resources including websites such as glassdoor that can even give advice that is legally *too* specific. Generally speaking though, there are obviously still many recurring elements of interviews such as common behavioural questions or common general knowledge testing, and I definitely think it's worth preparing for these to some minor extent at least. Once you get beyond that, doing as much research as you can to prepare for the *specific* interview you're doing is the most valuable thing so I have not much left to say. For CS interviews specifically, obviously grinding leetcode or general technical problems can be effective and potentially valuable to you if you feel unconfident in that area or find yourself struggling on the techincal portions of interviews time and time again. Keep in mind that even if you fail 100 interview stages, you only need to pass 1 to get a job in the end. Also remember that an interview judges your worth to a company, but certainly not your worth as a person.  

- MY ANECODTAL EXPERIENCES: Finding a job was stressful, especially having to do it while balancing school. I started applying sometime in september which is relatively early, but definitely not as early as a lot of people do. In the beginning, I applied exclusively through my university's co-op portal which didn't contain many notoriously difficult companies, it primarily consists of mid tier or relatively small companies. At the start, things were relatively relaxed, I didn't feel too much pressure and I was more or less just feeling things out by applying to a great deal of places. Honestly speaking, it wasn't too hard for me to secure interviews which I credit to an alright resume and a really good GPA, I think my interview rate was somewhere around 20% which I thought was quite comfortable. However, that means there were obviously a lot of applications that I didn't hear back from / got rejected from through early screening assessments (I literally got rejected from a company after a PERSONALITY TEST, still salty). For the first few interviews, I didn't really know how to prepare so I was definitely a little bit all over the place, brushing up on a lot of programming languages, searching up company info, etc. Unsurprisingly, they didn't go too well, but I treated them like learning experiences because that's what they were. In the next interview or two, I felt a little bit better, but they were definitely still pretty shaky. Then, in this one interview I felt like I had done pretty well, and one of the interviewers told me that I was essentially guaranteed to make it through to the final round which was a take home assessment. I felt pretty good about my chances since the first interview went well, and I thought I did quite well on the take home assessment. Because of this, I took my foot off the gas a little bit, and didn't apply / interview nearly as much as I could have (BIG MISTAKE). Then, I was struck by the oh too common tale of a ghosting. Even with multiple follow-ups, I had not heard back regarding a decision from this company. Finally, one of the interviewers who I messsaged on linkedin (generally a no-no, but this guy was super nice and specifically told me to reach out to him regarding anything) told me that he thought I was all but assured the job. This obviously boosted morale, and I took my foot almost completely off the gas, turning down another set of interviews. You can probably see where I'm going with this, but in the end after another extended waiting period and another follow-up, the interviewer I was in contact with told me that there was a miscommunication and my chances of getting the position were actually very low. This was obviously an extremely frustrating experience, but thankfully it didn't have too many practical repercussions, and it also taught me a lesson that I should've known. ALWAYS WAIT ON A CONTRACT (2022 update: seems like even a contract nowadays isn't enough *cough Coinbase cough* ) before completely relaxing. By this point, the end of the semester was near which meant finals were starting, so I decided that I would turn down all my interview requests, focus on my finals, and then put all my effort into finding a job next semester. However, then I received an interview request from a company that I had done online assessments for recently (if you're curious check my linkedin, but it's not really relevant so I will omit it here). This was a company that I was really interested in, so I made an exception and started preparing for a final round interview with them. I spent somewhere around 10 days preparing which was certainly the longest that I had done for a company, and this was during final season too. In conclusion, I thought I did really poorly on the interview and was definitely disappointed with the missed opportunity, but I had made my peace and life goes on. Then, I got the news about a week later that I had secured the position and that's where I am now. Definitely excited about it, and definitely feel very fortunate, but I think feeling that sense of disappointment was actually a really valuable experience because I got to see how I would think about and feel / react to the rejection, and it gave me some valuable introspective insight. As for the near future, I'm still thinking about whether I want to apply for other jobs that would start after the summer internship or whether I should just go back to school. Regardless, I definitely want to learn a lot / contribute a lot to the internship this summer and I hope it'll be a rewarding period. I will likely update this as things progress. 
